What are the chances of an asteroid hitting you?
An asteroid ended the age of the dinosaurs 66 million years ago. Could something as catastrophic as that happen again?
Asteroids are something astronomers closely track. Recently, the asteroid named 2024 YR4 made headlines for its tiny, but real, chance of colliding with Earth in 2032. In February 2025, NASA increased the impact probability of this asteroid hitting us to 2.3%. Scientists have calculated that YR4 is between 40m and 90m in diameter. It would have the power of a nuclear bomb if it was to hit Earth, causing severe damage if the impact was in a populated area. However, Dr Robert Massey of the Royal Astronomical Society urges calm. He said he is not "losing sleep over" the asteroid, but stresses that funding planetary defence and spotting potential threats is essential.
So what are asteroids? They are fragments of rock left over from the creation of the solar system 4.6 billion years ago. They frequently orbit close to Earth pushed by the gravity of other planets, though it was only in the late 1900s that scientists were able to systematically track near-Earth objects and learn this. They found that asteroids of more than 40m across, that's large enough to destroy a city, cross the Earth's path within lunar distance several times a year.
The chance of an asteroid being large enough to penetrate our atmosphere intact and destroy a city is likely to happen once in every hundred years. In 1908, an asteroid exploded over Siberia, injuring people and buildings across more than 500 square kilometres. However, actual impacts aren't as common as near-misses. For example, the asteroid Apophis raised alarms after it was discovered in 2004 because it was estimated to be around the size of a cruise ship. Even scarier, in 1994, the comet named Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashed into Jupiter, and, if it had hit Earth, all life would have been wiped out, just like the dinosaurs were.
So, it's safe to enjoy admiring the night sky because the chances of you being hit by an asteroid are very, very small, even if they're not zero.