Is food colouring bad for you?
Food colouring is difficult to avoid. From bright orange cheesy crisps to frosted cakes, and even peanuts and meat, these additives make food more visually appealing. But for years, people have been worried about their safety and the long-term effects on our bodies. So, just how bad is food colouring, and what are the alternatives?
Synthetic food dyes, like Red 40 and Yellow 6, have been linked to hyperactivity and attention problems in children, particularly those in key stages of brain development. Studies show that even small amounts of these dyes, which are commonly found in ultra-processed foods, can affect behaviour. In 2010, the EU began requiring warning labels on products containing specific artificial colourings associated with hyperactivity in children.
There are further issues too, such as allergic reactions. Yellow 5 has been shown to produce hives, itching and symptoms typically associated with asthma in some people. It's derived from petroleum and is found in a range of foods, medicine and cosmetics. Red 3 is also problematic – links have been found between the colour and cancer in male rats. This dye is almost completely banned in the UK now, and food manufacturers in the USA have been given until 2027 to modify foods that currently use it in their recipe.
So, what can artificial colours be replaced with? There are natural alternatives like beetroot, turmeric, paprika and spirulina. Companies such as Fermentalg based in France are developing natural colourings from microalgae, such as Galdieria sulphuraria, which produces a bright blue pigment. Products using this colour are expected to be on shop shelves in the USA soon, alongside other natural blue dyes like butterfly pea extract and gardenia blue, which have all recently been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the US. However, replacing synthetic dyes can be challenging because of stability, cost, and colour intensity. Natural dyes tend to be less vivid and have shorter shelf lives.
So, it's hard to avoid, but for your health do what you can to minimise unnecessary artificial colours in what you eat, and stick to natural alternatives instead.

