The benefits of pocket parks
How often do you go to the park? Is it part of your everyday life, or a trip that you plan? Many large urban parks are situated far from where people live, meaning they are a destination for planned visits rather than everyday life. For example, only 14% of the population of Los Angeles have a park within walking distance. Also, the distribution of such parks is often relatively unequal, meaning that they benefit some areas and groups of people much more than others. A number of studies have shown that it is often disadvantaged neighbourhoods that lack easy access to green spaces. It's rarely practical to address this by creating large new parks, but designating small parcels of land, empty lots, or even parts of quiet streets as pocket parks can have a major impact on residents' quality of life.
Often no larger than a few tennis courts and located within neighbourhoods close to where people live, these green spaces can strengthen community bonds. They provide a place to meet neighbours, or a play area for children. Green gyms or ball game areas can give local people a space to exercise in, improving public health outcomes. Local businesses can use spaces to promote their products or organise events to help them grow. A study by the University of Philadelphia, showed that crime was reduced in neighbourhoods with pocket parks, compared to those which left empty spaces derelict. Studies report that where space is used to make pocket parks, communities feel greater ownership of and attachment towards their neighbourhood.
As well as benefits for the human population, an increase in green space can benefit the local environment. Pocket parks can act as stepping stones, allowing wildlife to travel across the city, as well as providing habitats for different species. Parks provide increased tree canopy cover, offering shade which can counteract urban heat island effects, helping to reduce temperatures. Trees also help to reduce air pollution, and green space allows water to drain away, reducing flood risks. Could pocket parks be a relatively cheap way to strengthen communities and improve local environments?