Flying pollutes, but what can we do instead?
Flying has revolutionised the way we navigate the world. It's often the quickest and most convenient way to travel long distances. But there's a catch – it's one of the most carbon-intensive activities the average person is likely to do. In 2018, a small group of celebrities in Sweden led the 'flygskam' movement, meaning 'flight shame' in English, to encourage people to give up flying. But, for people who need or love to travel, what can we offer as green alternatives?
For medium to long-distance travel, it seems trains are our best bet. Using a train instead of a domestic flight reduces emissions by 86%, according to the 2023 article 'Which form of transport has the smallest carbon footprint?'. A downside is that trains can be more expensive than flying with low-cost airlines. Another is that it might take hours longer to reach your destination, and most people don't want to spend a large part of their trip travelling from A to B. That's where sleeper trains come in. European rail networks are expanding, which means passengers can travel while sleeping and wake up in a new city or country!
For shorter distances, many would be willing to swap cars for bicycles, but few would consider cycling internationally. Among those few, Matilda Welin. It took her 17 days to cycle from London to Sweden. Sadly, she concluded that her trip neither benefitted the planet nor saved her money. But, it did change her perspective. She says "As I pedalled, I felt I was experiencing the true distance of the journey I take so casually and so often with a plane." She describes how the world around her changed slowly; the languages, the architecture, the landscapes – something she wouldn't have appreciated on a flight.
Unfortunately for the planet, air travel remains a popular option – around 100,000 planes take off globally per day. But, further investment in rail infrastructure and subsidising ticket fares could help get more people on trains than planes.